docs: Add release notes for 0.297 (#27484)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.297.rst

=============
Release 0.297
=============

**Breaking Changes**
====================

> * Add support for procedure calls in access control. For existing access controls (file-based, ranger, and sql-standard), procedure calls are restricted by default. See :doc:`/connector/hive-security` for details on how to allow them. `#26803 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26803>`_

Reviewer: I think procedure calls are only restricted for sql-standard and ranger based controls. For file-based, it is enabled by default. Please correct me if I am wrong @hantangwangd

Reviewer 2: Hi @pratyakshsharma, thanks for reaching out — that's a good point worth clarifying. As I understand it, the rules defined in the configuration file for file-based access control are a type of grant rule, not a type of deny rule. That is to say, if no procedure rule is defined (by default), no user has permission to call any procedures.

To verify this, we can delete the procedure rules defined in `presto-hive/src/test/resources/com.facebook.presto.hive/security.json`, and then run the tests in `TestHiveFileBasedSecurity`. We will find that `testCallProcedures` fails because of `Access denied`. Please let me know if you see any problems.

Reviewer: @hantangwangd I was reading through the docs here https://prestodb.io/docs/current/connector/iceberg.html#file-based-authorization and it is mentioned that `All regexes default to .* if not specified`. That made me believe that if procedure rules are not specified, but the file is still present, that means all users are granted permissions. 
But I would like to test this once on my local. Let me do that, and we can make the docs more clear accordingly, if needed.

Reviewer: Unable to run the test - 

```
java.lang.RuntimeException: java.lang.ExceptionInInitializerError

	at com.facebook.presto.tests.AbstractTestingPrestoClient.execute(AbstractTestingPrestoClient.java:127)
	at com.facebook.presto.tests.DistributedQueryRunner.execute(DistributedQueryRunner.java:970)
	at com.facebook.presto.tests.DistributedQueryRunner.execute(DistributedQueryRunner.java:892)
	at com.facebook.presto.tests.QueryAssertions.copyTable(QueryAssertions.java:493)
	at com.facebook.presto.tests.QueryAssertions.copyTables(QueryAssertions.java:473)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HiveQueryRunner.createQueryRunner(HiveQueryRunner.java:287)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HiveQueryRunner.createQueryRunner(HiveQueryRunner.java:182)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HiveQueryRunner.createQueryRunner(HiveQueryRunner.java:165)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HiveQueryRunner.createQueryRunner(HiveQueryRunner.java:137)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.TestHiveFileBasedSecurity.setUp(TestHiveFileBasedSecurity.java:44)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.NativeMethodAccessorImpl.invoke0(Native Method)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.NativeMethodAccessorImpl.invoke(NativeMethodAccessorImpl.java:77)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.invoke(DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.java:43)
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.Method.invoke(Method.java:568)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.MethodInvocationHelper.invokeMethod(MethodInvocationHelper.java:135)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.MethodInvocationHelper.invokeMethodConsideringTimeout(MethodInvocationHelper.java:65)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.ConfigInvoker.invokeConfigurationMethod(ConfigInvoker.java:381)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.ConfigInvoker.invokeConfigurations(ConfigInvoker.java:319)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.TestMethodWorker.invokeBeforeClassMethods(TestMethodWorker.java:178)
	at org.testng.internal.invokers.TestMethodWorker.run(TestMethodWorker.java:122)
	at java.base/java.util.ArrayList.forEach(ArrayList.java:1511)
	at org.testng.TestRunner.privateRun(TestRunner.java:808)
	at org.testng.TestRunner.run(TestRunner.java:603)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunner.runTest(SuiteRunner.java:429)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunner.runSequentially(SuiteRunner.java:423)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunner.privateRun(SuiteRunner.java:383)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunner.run(SuiteRunner.java:326)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunnerWorker.runSuite(SuiteRunnerWorker.java:52)
	at org.testng.SuiteRunnerWorker.run(SuiteRunnerWorker.java:95)
	at org.testng.TestNG.runSuitesSequentially(TestNG.java:1249)
	at org.testng.TestNG.runSuitesLocally(TestNG.java:1169)
	at org.testng.TestNG.runSuites(TestNG.java:1092)
	at org.testng.TestNG.run(TestNG.java:1060)
	at com.intellij.rt.testng.IDEARemoteTestNG.run(IDEARemoteTestNG.java:66)
	at com.intellij.rt.testng.RemoteTestNGStarter.main(RemoteTestNGStarter.java:105)
Caused by: java.lang.ExceptionInInitializerError
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.serde2.objectinspector.ObjectInspectorFactory.getStandardStructObjectInspector(ObjectInspectorFactory.java:320)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.serde2.objectinspector.ObjectInspectorFactory.getStandardStructObjectInspector(ObjectInspectorFactory.java:312)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.RecordFileWriter.<init>(RecordFileWriter.java:106)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HiveWriterFactory.createWriter(HiveWriterFactory.java:392)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HivePageSink.getWriterIndexes(HivePageSink.java:415)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HivePageSink.writePage(HivePageSink.java:340)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HivePageSink.doAppend(HivePageSink.java:335)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HivePageSink.lambda$appendPage$2(HivePageSink.java:321)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.authentication.HdfsAuthentication.lambda$doAs$0(HdfsAuthentication.java:24)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.authentication.NoHdfsAuthentication.doAs(NoHdfsAuthentication.java:23)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.authentication.HdfsAuthentication.doAs(HdfsAuthentication.java:23)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HdfsEnvironment.doAs(HdfsEnvironment.java:85)
	at com.facebook.presto.hive.HivePageSink.appendPage(HivePageSink.java:321)
	at com.facebook.presto.spi.connector.classloader.ClassLoaderSafeConnectorPageSink.appendPage(ClassLoaderSafeConnectorPageSink.java:74)
	at com.facebook.presto.operator.TableWriterOperator.addInput(TableWriterOperator.java:338)
	at com.facebook.presto.operator.Driver.processInternal(Driver.java:458)
	at com.facebook.presto.operator.Driver.lambda$processFor$11(Driver.java:331)
	at com.facebook.presto.operator.Driver.tryWithLock(Driver.java:757)
	at com.facebook.presto.operator.Driver.processFor(Driver.java:324)
	at com.facebook.presto.execution.SqlTaskExecution$DriverSplitRunner.processFor(SqlTaskExecution.java:1078)
	at com.facebook.presto.execution.executor.PrioritizedSplitRunner.process(PrioritizedSplitRunner.java:165)
	at com.facebook.presto.execution.executor.TaskExecutor$TaskRunner.run(TaskExecutor.java:619)
	at com.facebook.presto.$gen.Presto_null__testversion____20260422_141858_1.run(Unknown Source)
	at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor.runWorker(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:1136)
	at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor$Worker.run(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:635)
	at java.base/java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:833)
Caused by: java.lang.reflect.InaccessibleObjectException: Unable to make field private volatile java.lang.String java.net.URI.string accessible: module java.base does not "opens java.net" to unnamed module @7bc1a03d
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.AccessibleObject.checkCanSetAccessible(AccessibleObject.java:354)
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.AccessibleObject.checkCanSetAccessible(AccessibleObject.java:297)
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.Field.checkCanSetAccessible(Field.java:178)
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.Field.setAccessible(Field.java:172)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.common.StringInternUtils.<clinit>(StringInternUtils.java:57)
	... 26 more
```

Any suggestions?

Reviewer 3: Follow the README for required settings in JDK 17.

Reviewer: It turns out something was messed up in my IDE setup. Restarting IDE helped. 
Thank you for the suggestion @tdcmeehan , I had the VM flags already in my settings. 

I ran the above test case and yes procedures are restricted for file based access control as well. Thank you for your time @hantangwangd

* Add ability to disable the UI. This can be toggled with the ``webui-enabled`` configuration property. `#26682 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26682>`_
* Add comprehensive :doc:`/admin/jmx-metrics` for metadata operations. `#26875 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26875>`_
* Add configurable freshness thresholds for materialized views using :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`materialized_view_stale_read_behavior\`\`` session property and :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`materialized-view-stale-read-behavior\`\`` configuration property. `#26764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26764>`_
* Add cost-based selection for materialized view query rewriting, choosing the lowest-cost plan when multiple views are applicable. This can be enabled with the ``materialized_view_query_rewrite_cost_based_selection_enabled`` session property. `#27222 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27222>`_
* Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_

> * Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over join keys by simplifying them based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of queries with redundant `COALESCE` expressions over join keys by simplifying them based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_
```

> * Add DDL support for dropping a tag from a table. `#23614 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/23614>`_
> * Add HTTP support to the resource manager. See :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`resource-manager.http-server-enabled\`\`` and :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`internal-communication.resource-manager-communication-protocol\`\``. `#26635 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26635>`_
> * Add OpenLineage event listener plugin for emitting query lifecycle events in the OpenLineage format. The plugin supports console and HTTP transports, configurable query type filtering, and column-level lineage tracking. See :doc:`/develop/openlineage-event-listener` for configuration details. `#27249 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27249>`_
> * Add ``USE_STITCHING`` mode for ``materialized_view_stale_read_behavior`` session property to selectively recompute stale data instead of full recomputation. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
> * Add ``materialized_view_force_stale`` session property for testing stale read behavior. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
> * Add ``materialized_view_staleness_window`` session property to configure acceptable staleness duration. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
> * Add a new ``http-server.https.keystore.scan-interval-seconds`` configuration flag to scan the keystore file periodically for new certs. `#26739 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26739>`_
> * Add ability to disable the UI. This can be toggled with the ``webui-enabled`` configuration property. `#26682 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26682>`_
> * Add comprehensive :doc:`/admin/jmx-metrics` for metadata operations. `#26875 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26875>`_
> * Add configurable freshness thresholds for materialized views using :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`materialized_view_stale_read_behavior\`\`` session property and :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`materialized-view-stale-read-behavior\`\`` configuration property. `#26764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26764>`_
> * Add cost-based selection for materialized view query rewriting, choosing the lowest-cost plan when multiple views are applicable. This can be enabled with the ``materialized_view_query_rewrite_cost_based_selection_enabled`` session property. `#27222 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27222>`_
> * Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_
> * Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over join keys by simplifying them based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_
> * Improve performance of queries using grouping sets by pre-aggregating data before row multiplication. Enabled using session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_
> * Add :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`optimizer.remote-function-names-for-fixed-parallelism\`\`` configuration property to control the number of tasks for remote project node. `#27044 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27044>`_

Reviewer 3: Fix ordering

```suggestion
* Improve performance of queries using grouping sets by pre-aggregating data before row multiplication. Enabled using session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_
* Add DDL statements for ``CREATE BRANCH``. `#26898 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26898>`_
* Add DDL support for dropping a branch from a table. `#23614 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/23614>`_
* Add DDL support for dropping a tag from a table. `#23614 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/23614>`_
* Add HTTP support to the resource manager. See :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`resource-manager.http-server-enabled\`\`` and :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`internal-communication.resource-manager-communication-protocol\`\``. `#26635 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26635>`_
* Add OpenLineage event listener plugin for emitting query lifecycle events in the OpenLineage format. The plugin supports console and HTTP transports, configurable query type filtering, and column-level lineage tracking. See :doc:`/develop/openlineage-event-listener` for configuration details. `#27249 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27249>`_
* Add ``USE_STITCHING`` mode for ``materialized_view_stale_read_behavior`` session property to selectively recompute stale data instead of full recomputation. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
* Add ``materialized_view_force_stale`` session property for testing stale read behavior. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
* Add ``materialized_view_staleness_window`` session property to configure acceptable staleness duration. `#26728 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26728>`_
* Add a new ``http-server.https.keystore.scan-interval-seconds`` configuration flag to scan the keystore file periodically for new certs. `#26739 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26739>`_
* Add ability to disable the UI. This can be toggled with the ``webui-enabled`` configuration property. `#26682 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26682>`_
* Add comprehensive :doc:`/admin/jmx-metrics` for metadata operations. `#26875 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26875>`_
* Add configurable freshness thresholds for materialized views using :ref:`admin/properties-session:\`\`materialized_view_stale_read_behavior\`\`` session property and :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`materialized-view-stale-read-behavior\`\`` configuration property. `#26764 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26764>`_
* Add cost-based selection for materialized view query rewriting, choosing the lowest-cost plan when multiple views are applicable. This can be enabled with the ``materialized_view_query_rewrite_cost_based_selection_enabled`` session property. `#27222 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27222>`_
* Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over join keys by simplifying them based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_
* Add :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`optimizer.remote-function-names-for-fixed-parallelism\`\`` configuration property to control the number of tasks for remote project node. `#27044 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27044>`_
```

* Fix ``EXPLAIN TYPE IO`` to support columns with temporal types. `#26942 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26942>`_
* Fix materialized view query optimizer by correctly resolving table references to schema-qualified names. `#27059 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27059>`_
* Fix Materialized Views with ``DEFINER`` rights to require ``CREATE_VIEW_WITH_SELECT_COLUMNS`` on base tables. `#26902 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26902>`_
* Fix a bug where queries could get permanently stuck in resource groups when coordinator task-based throttling (``experimental.max-total-running-task-count-to-not-execute-new-query``) is enabled. `#27146 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27146>`_
* Fix /v1/info/metrics endpoint to return application/json or text/plain based on the request Accept header. `#26639 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26639>`_
* Improve ``LIKE '%substring%'`` pattern matching by rewriting to ``STRPOS`` instead of ``CARDINALITY(SPLIT(...))``, improving CPU and memory efficiency. `#27311 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27311>`_

> * Improve performance of ``UNNEST`` by adding a ``PushdownThroughUnnest`` optimizer rule that pushes projections and filter conjuncts not dependent on unnest output variables below the UnnestNode. This rule is controlled using the ``pushdown_through_unnest`` session property (default enabled). `#27125 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27125>`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of ``UNNEST`` by adding a ``PushdownThroughUnnest`` optimizer rule that pushes projections and filter through the unnest when possible. This rule is controlled using the ``pushdown_through_unnest`` session property (default enabled). `#27125 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27125>`_
```

* Add developer documentation for :doc:`/develop/table-functions`. `#27367 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27367>`_
* Add documentation for :doc:`/functions/table`. `#27333 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27333>`_
* Add documentation for Presto queries to run in Presto C++ to :doc:`/presto_cpp/limitations`. `#27120 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27120>`_
* Add expression simplification rule to flatten nested ``IF`` expressions: ``IF(x, IF(y, v, E), E)`` is rewritten to ``IF(x AND y, v, E)`` when the outer and inner else branches are identical. Handles arbitrary nesting depth and both null and non-null else branches. `#27267 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27267>`_
* Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over equi-join key pairs based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations for tool-generated queries. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_

> * Add optimizer rule to pre-aggregate data before GroupId node in grouping sets queries, reducing row multiplication. Enabled via session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. (:pr:`27290`). `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Add optimizer rule to pre-aggregate data before GroupId node in grouping sets queries, reducing row multiplication. Enabled via session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_
```

* Update netty from version 4.1.130.Final to 4.2.10.Final. `#27277 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27277>`_
* Update timezone data to 2025b by upgrading to Joda-Time 2.14.0. `#26981 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26981>`_
* Upgrade Apache Arrow to 18.3.0 and protobuf-java to 4.30.2. `#27134 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27134>`_
* Upgrade Apache Pinot to 1.4.0. `#26684 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26684>`_
* Upgrade Jetty to 12.0.29 in response to `CVE-2025-5115 <https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2025-5115>`_. `#26739 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26739>`_
* Upgrade airbase version to 108. `#26807 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26807>`_
* Upgrade com.facebook.airlift version to 225. `#26768 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26768>`_

Prestissimo (native Execution) Changes
______________________________________
* Add TextReader support for tables in ``TEXTFILE`` format. `#25995 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25995>`_

> * Add ``native_max_target_file_size`` session property to control the maximum target file size for writers. When a file exceeds this size during writing, the writer will close the current file and start writing to a new file. `#27054 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27054>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Add ``native_max_target_file_size`` session property to control the maximum target file size for writers. When a file exceeds this size during writing, the writer will close the current file and start writing to a new file. See :ref:`connector/hive:hive session properties`. `#27054 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27054>`_
```

* Add a native expression optimizer for optimizing expressions in the sidecar. `#24602 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24602>`_
* Add support for `NativeFunctionHandle` parsing. `#26948 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26948>`_
* Add worker uptime metric \`presto_cpp.worker_runtime_uptime_secs\` to track worker process runtime. `#26979 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26979>`_

Security Changes
________________

> * Fix CSP by removing `img-src 'http: https:'` in response to `CWE-693 <https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/693.html>`_. :pr:`25910`. `#26790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26790>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Remove ``http: https:`` in response to `CWE-693 <https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/693.html>`_. :pr:`25910`. `#26790 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26790>`_
```

* Upgrade Parquet version to 1.16.0. `#26879 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26879>`_

Lance Connector Changes
_______________________
* Fix ClassCastException when reading Float16 columns by widening to Float32. `#27324 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27324>`_
* Add :doc:`/connector/lance` for reading and writing LanceDB datasets. `#27185 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27185>`_

Oracle Connector Changes
________________________
* Update Oracle test classes to re-enable them. `#25762 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25762>`_

Pinot Connector Changes
_______________________
* Add TLS support for self-signed certificate. `#26151 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26151>`_
* Add validation for schema names in Pinot connector. `#26725 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26725>`_

SPI Changes
___________
* Update SPI method ``Connector.beginTransaction`` in a backward compatible way to support passing the autocommit context into connector transactions. `#25003 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/25003>`_

Documentation Changes
_____________________

> * Improve documentation of plugin loaded functions by grouping them in :ref:`functions/plugin-loaded-functions:array functions`. `#26926 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26926>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Improve documentation of plugin loaded functions by grouping them in :ref:`functions/plugin-loaded-functions:array functions`. `#26926 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26926>`_
* Add developer documentation for :doc:`/develop/table-functions`. `#27367 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27367>`_
* Add documentation for :doc:`/functions/table`. `#27333 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27333>`_
* Add documentation for Presto queries to run in Presto C++ to :doc:`/presto_cpp/limitations`. `#27120 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27120>`_
```

* Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over equi-join key pairs based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations for tool-generated queries. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_
* Add optimizer rule to pre-aggregate data before GroupId node in grouping sets queries, reducing row multiplication. Enabled via session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyAggregationsOverConstant`` that simplifies aggregations over constant inputs (``MIN``, ``MAX``, ``ARBITRARY``, ``APPROX_DISTINCT``) to constants. Controlled by the ``simplify_aggregations_over_constant`` session property (disabled by default). `#27246 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27246>`_

> * Add optimizer rule ``PushSemiJoinThroughUnion`` that pushes a ``SemiJoinNode``, along with the underlying ``ProjectNode``, through a ``UnionNode``. Controlled by the ``optimizer.push-semi-join-through-union`` configuration property or the ``push_semi_join_through_union`` session property (disabled by default). `#27176 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27176>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Improve performance of semi-join (``IN``) queries where the probe/source side is a ``UNION`` by pushing the join through the union. Controlled by ``optimizer.push-semi-join-through-union`` configuration property or the ``push_semi_join_through_union`` session property (disabled by default). `#27176 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27176>`_
```

* Add support for :doc:`/sql/create-vector-index`, which creates vector search indexes on table columns with configurable index properties and partition filtering using an ``UPDATING FOR`` clause. `#27307 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27307>`_
* Add :doc:`/connector/lance` for reading and writing LanceDB datasets. `#27185 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27185>`_
* Upgrade Iceberg version to 1.10.0. `#26879 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26879>`_

**Details**
===========

General Changes
_______________
* Fix ``DESCRIBE`` and ``SHOW COLUMNS`` queries hanging in ``PLANNING`` state on clusters with single-node execution enabled. `#27456 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27456>`_
* Fix ``EXPLAIN TYPE IO`` to support columns with temporal types. `#26942 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26942>`_
* Fix materialized view query optimizer by correctly resolving table references to schema-qualified names. `#27059 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27059>`_
* Fix Materialized Views with ``DEFINER`` rights to require ``CREATE_VIEW_WITH_SELECT_COLUMNS`` on base tables. `#26902 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26902>`_

> * Fix a bug where adaptive partial aggregation could incorrectly bypass INTERMEDIATE aggregation steps in the optimizer. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_

Reviewer 3: Not user facing

* Add materialized CTE support for single node execution. `#26794 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26794>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyCoalesceOverJoinKeys`` that simplifies redundant ``COALESCE`` expressions over equi-join key pairs based on join type, enabling bucketed join optimizations for tool-generated queries. Controlled by the ``simplify_coalesce_over_join_keys`` session property (disabled by default). `#27250 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27250>`_
* Add optimizer rule to pre-aggregate data before GroupId node in grouping sets queries, reducing row multiplication. Enabled via session property ``pre_aggregate_before_grouping_sets``. `#27290 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27290>`_
* Add optimizer rule ``SimplifyAggregationsOverConstant`` that simplifies aggregations over constant inputs (``MIN``, ``MAX``, ``ARBITRARY``, ``APPROX_DISTINCT``) to constants. Controlled by the ``simplify_aggregations_over_constant`` session property (disabled by default). `#27246 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27246>`_

> * Add optimizer rule ``PushSemiJoinThroughUnion`` that pushes a ``SemiJoinNode``, along with the underlying ``ProjectNode``, through a ``UnionNode``. Controlled by the ``optimizer.push-semi-join-through-union`` configuration property or the ``push_semi_join_through_union`` session property (disabled by default). `#27176 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27176>`_

Reviewer 3: This is not user facing, users don't know about our plan nodes.  It shoudl describe the specific improvement the user is expected to see.

* Add options to control the number of tasks for remote project node. `#27044 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27044>`_
* Add options to force shuffle table scan input if the number of files to be scanned is small. `#26941 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26941>`_

> * Add options to skip projection pushdown through exchange rule. `#26943 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26943>`_

Reviewer 4: > Add the config property here, link to documentation

There is no documentation for https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26943.

* Add MV data consistency support for ``CTAS`` and ``INSERT`` statements. `#27302 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27302>`_
* Add DDL statements for ``CREATE TAG``. `#27113 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27113>`_
* Replace ``experimental.max-total-running-task-count-to-not-execute-new-query`` with :ref:`admin/properties:\`\`max-total-running-task-count-to-not-execute-new-query\`\``. This is backwards compatible. `#27146 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27146>`_
* Remove implicit bundling of SQL invoked function plugins from the default Presto server Provisio build. `#26926 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26926>`_
* Update Session to serialize and deserialize selectedUser and reasonForSelect to SessionRepresentation, allowing ``INSERT`` and ``DELETE`` query sessions to contain these fields. `#27360 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/27360>`_
* Update timezone data to 2025b by upgrading to Joda-Time 2.14.0. `#26981 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/26981>`_

Prestissimo (Native Execution) Changes
______________________________________

> * Add Window filter pushdown in native engine for ``rank`` and ``dense_rank`` functions. Use session property ``optimizer.optimize-top-n-rank`` to enable the rewrite. `#24138 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24138>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Add Window filter pushdown in native engine for ``rank`` and ``dense_rank`` functions. Use session property :ref:`presto_cpp/properties-session:\`\`optimizer.optimize_top_n_rank\`\`` to enable the rewrite. `#24138 <https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/24138>`_
```
